Hello, and thank you for listening to the Microbinfeed podcast. Here, we will be
discussing topics in microbial bioinformatics. We hope that we can give you some
insights, tips, and tricks along the way. There is so much information we all
know from working in the field, but nobody writes it down. There is no manual,
and it's assumed you'll pick it up. We hope to fill in a few of these gaps. My
co-hosts are Dr. Nabil Ali Khan and Dr. Andrew Page. I am Dr. Lee Katz. Both
Andrew and Nabil work in the Quadram Institute in Norwich, UK, where they work
on microbes in food and the impact on human health. I work at Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention and am an adjunct member at the University of
Georgia in the U.S. Hello and welcome to the Microbinfeed podcast. This episode,
we will be talking about the sustainability of bioinformatics software.
Bioinformatics software currently lacks long-term support and maturity. We will
discuss what is causing this currently and what we think needs to change for us
to move the field forward. Do we continue with the new hope of academic style
work, or do we go to a more rigorous model? Nabil, you want to kick it off?
Yeah, let's kick it off with just describing how academic software development
currently works. At the moment, it's usually backed by short-term funding. It's
a project for a postdoc or a PhD student who, when they leave the project, the
software then dies. The average lifespan of bioinformatics software, therefore,
is about three to five years, which is the lifespan of the grant or the contract
of the person working on it. There are a number of different ways that software
working in this way will die. There are things like when an academic, like the
group leader, moves to a new institution or gets a new grant, the software will
cease to be maintained. There's very little funding for longer-term maintenance.
It's just not sexy. Developers want to talk about novelty, and they want to talk
about exciting new technologies, and they often don't want to maintain software.
There are often areas where people work on a project, and they publish the paper
describing their new tool, and they think that that's the end of it. In reality,
when you put a piece of software up there, and people use it, you have to look
after those users, and you have to add in new things as they require or fix bugs
and so on. Andrew? Yes. I'm one of those academics who moved institution and
left behind a long trail of software that needs to be maintained. Unfortunately,
for people who I left behind, they ended up having to field all of the bug
requests, or the bug reports, and the feature requests, and things like that. I
know that I'm not paid to work at the weekends and the evenings on software I
did for a different employer a few years ago. For me, there has to be a cutoff,
and if I've published something five years ago, then should I really be
maintaining it now for free? Yes. That's definitely something that's happened
with me in larger infrastructure projects. For instance, when I was working on
Entrabase, and this is an example that speaks wider for the utility of MNST,
multi-local sequence typing is a standard method used by a lot of reference labs
now, instead of a lot of other, say serological typing or genotyping methods.
These databases that drive these schemes need to be kept consistent and need to
be maintained. People need to review the sequence types and the alleles going
into these databases, but there is very little central funding for that. It's
essentially a service given for free. The projects, the databases that look
after it, jump from grant to grant, and often the people driving it just are
trying to always come up with a research angle to make it novel and fresh, while
also trying to carve out some space to do the background day-to-day maintenance.
I think Lee also has an MNST example as well. Yeah, actually, I almost forgot
this, that in my PhD about 100 years ago, I made a 7-genome LST website, and I
did it hand-in-hand with my co-PI at CDC and with my lab at Georgia Tech. It was
a web server that analyzed meningococcal 7-gene MLST, and after about 5 or 10
years, actually the web server went offline. I had moved to the meningitis lab
and onto then foodborne, so I was two steps away from my academic career, and no
one was left to maintain it or to even know how to ask how to put it back
online, and it was superseded by the next graduate student, and by the
meningitis lab. I believe now it is better sustained, much better sustained in
the newest project, but I was definitely one of those academics that just moved
on and I was not being paid either to maintain that thing. Yeah, exactly.
There's a lot of maintenance man hours that have to be put in behind the scenes
to keep these things going. These are very simple but important things like,
say, security updates or updating it with new internal libraries or updating it
with new changes in the programming language. You don't necessarily have to be
adding new features to have a lot of work just to keep something running, and
that's on top of answering user queries and bug fixes. There is always a moving
target of having a polished software project, and that takes a lot of effort,
ongoing effort to look after. But in some cases we've been successful, and some
software does seem to persist and work, so I'm interested to hear from both of
you, what are the examples where software did manage to succeed and has managed
to have some staying power? Well, for me the shining example is SamTools, but
that's only come about because there's an entire team of people behind it, and
it's all open source and they're very much engaged with the community and with
multiple institutions to try and keep it going, but in that case it's long-term
sustainable funding which has kept that alive. You have then other projects like
Canoe which came out of Celera, and again someone has taken a long-term decision
to keep that alive and keep improving it and keep making it better and better
and better all the time, but not everyone has the luxury of that, and a lot of
people, academics often have a lot of pulls on their time, maybe through
teaching loads or the requirement to publish every few years and get that Nature
paper every two, three years, and not everyone can take the time to continue
supporting all their old stuff. And it is a lot of work, you know, from simple
things, you might have done the best documentation in the world, but you'll
always get people who come along who haven't read documentation and need a
little bit of extra help and support. Unfortunately the answer sometimes I have
to give them, particularly if they're in a commercial organisation, is that they
have to pay for support if they want it, and you know, when they start hearing
proper commercial rates, they run away, you know? I know we're talking about a
lot of academic stuff, but I was just thinking about it, while you're talking
about it, Blast is a great example of well-maintained software over time. It's
government funded, so it's not exactly academic, but it's another example like
SamTools where the whole bioinformatics community has to use it at one point or
another, and it is well-maintained, it's well-documented, so that is a really
good shining example. Galaxy as well is a fantastic example as well of
bioinformatics software that's just stuck around for many years, and that's, I
suppose, because they've got a huge critical mass of people who are working on
it, rather than, you know, 50 people reinventing the wheel, making workflow
manager, they've gotten together, they've made one really, really good workflow
manager on website, and they've kept at it, you know? Year on year, they've
worked on it, there's multiple grants from different institutions around the
world, so it's funded in the US, it's funded in the EU in Germany, and in a
variety of different places, you know, it's got a lot of critical mass support,
which I think you need for larger projects, but then not every project is big
enough, or every field is big enough to support software that way, you know,
because a lot of what we do is very, very niche. Before coronavirus came out...
you know there's probably only a handful of people in the world working on the
genomics of coronavirus probably not even and it's only now we we realize oh
this is an area we need to put a lot of stuff into but prior to that there's
virtually nothing. One just popped in my head was FastQC as another one this is
a quick example I think that's been around for quite a while. That's funded by
Baberham isn't it? Exactly. BBSRC. Yep keep it up keep funding vital software.
Sorry yeah we only bring that up because BBSRC is the funder that Nabil and I
work for. Oh I did not know that okay. Hint hint please fund more of our
software. Actually BBSRC are one of the few funders to have a separate call
every year or yeah separate call every year on for tools and resources and it's
basically not for the new shiny thing but it's for keeping certain software
applications going and certain databases going that have become critical to the
industry but often as from what I've heard it's vastly oversubscribed because
anyone who's going for anything and then needs continuing funding you know tries
to throw an application into this but of course you know there's only a small
pot of money if we could have more like that that'd be great. Yeah I think the
funds in those pots are quite limited it's and a lot of them a lot of them have
very strange ear marking they tend to be for capital equipment or things like
that and not necessarily staff and it's actually the staff it's work hours that
you really need to keep something going. Yeah programmers are pricey. Exactly.
But of course people get around this you know they can rebrand their software
they add in a new buzzword they make it work in a slightly different domain
instead of bacteria be yeast instead of yeast it'll be viruses you know people
people find ways to get around things or they stick a version two on the end and
say it's a totally brand new thing or they put in the cloud because cloud things
are obviously so much fluffier. One trick is to migrate your software from a
desktop application to a web application. To a phone you know if you have it on
an app it's you know it's obviously great. But hopefully everyone out there is
getting the impression that the only way software really does continue is you
have a very savvy group leader who can come up with a good story to keep it
going or a large institution takes it over as a core project for themselves
otherwise there's very little hope for any tool that we write to persist longer
than the three to five year mark of what most people's contracts tend to tend to
last for. So you're saying that a lot of the software that is produced by
academics it's a very low quality and we probably don't want to continue anyway
we probably want to kill it off pretty quick. Yeah there is a thing that and
don't get me wrong I mean it's really important that people experiment with new
software and new methods and prototype different ideas but we need to draw a
line and most software is actually more or less a prototype and should remain as
such. I think when I reviewed for different journals I found that the software
submitted suffers from the sort of Dunning-Kruger effect where the people know
enough to produce a software package but not enough to actually assess that this
package really is a bespoke thing for their specific project and not fit for
mass consumption. That's a flyway saying it'll only ever run on their laptop.
Well a lot of it is glorified bash scripts and a lot of it is really hard-coded
you know folder parts and things like that which just isn't acceptable. And also
people think if they have spent six months or a year building this piece of
software that it is worth publishing regardless you know whereas maybe if
they've gotten a professional software engineer or someone like that who
actually knew what they're doing it might have taken two weeks and the problem
they're solving isn't actually that big or publishable and that's a hard truth
for some people. Yeah it is important to recognize that they've produced a thing
and they've produced some sort of output and really the best way for us in our
community is publication. But yeah so it's difficult I think part of it
struggles because we don't have a good avenue for software for the sort of basic
software even just to get us just to get acknowledged somewhere so that a
student can feel like yeah I wrote a thing and here it is and then they can
carry on. It's a lot of it is like kind of the incentive model then it's in this
case with academics it's you want to get credit for the thing you've been
working on for six years or how much scientific thought you put into this and
you want to publish it but the actual product after the paper you might get the
paper out but you might get the paper out but then the actual software might not
be very sustainable. Yeah we've said this before if you write a bioinformatics
tool and nobody cites it did you really write a tool? That's a good question.
Yeah and definitely this is exacerbated by people who reinvent the wheel over
and over and over again and this harks back to our first episode like how many
assemblers and aligners do we really really need at this point but there is a
value for a student to take a genome assembler apart and understand how it works
to tweak it but I'm not quite sure that should be presented as a polished
software tool people can use but then so I mean while we've been discussing
these different issues we've come we've touched on the issue that getting credit
for your work seems to be a problem. How have both of you managed to facilitate
credit or how would you get credit for work that you've done on a software
project? I would say that it is kind of like an incentive issue and credit is a
major incentive for this kind of stuff. I see where a lot of people come from
where they want to kind of take credit and exclude others for you know just
minor credit which I can kind of understand that there's a certain threshold for
giving someone like authorship but I think it doesn't cost anything to give
authorship to people who have contributed something to the project so I think
one model for incentive for giving credit is you know anybody who's made a
commit to you at least acknowledge them if they've done something significant
give them authorship don't be stingy it costs you nothing really to to give
credit to somebody so I think that's a good really good way to get community
support and if you get community support then you might get more sustainability.
Yeah that's a very difficult issue especially in say a large manuscript where
there's a scientific component to it as well experimental component to it and
people behind that project and then the software are a specific set of people
and then there's a different set of people who maybe help out with the software
but aren't necessarily involved in the science and so there's a feeling that the
latter shouldn't be on as an author on the paper because they don't they haven't
contributed to the scientific component which is fine but then those people do
need to get acknowledged so in the past I quite like the idea of having a
community group or development group and having that as an author in the author
lifts and then having a list of all the contributors to that as a footnote in
the manuscript just so that you recognize the different levels of contribution
but people still do get acknowledged because if you don't acknowledge people and
you don't thank people for helping you out we can never really have the open
source community-driven software that we that people seem to assume will exist.
So we've now outlined the major issues with sustainability of academic software
in the field. These problems kind of flow around experimental projects which
lead to experimental software and then there's no long-term maintenance plan.
There's no incentive to maintain past, for example, the graduation date.
Programs are not modular. They're unstructured and all these issues make it
difficult for the community to take over like a modular design which is what is
implied by the way we approach development and the development of funding. It's
an important issue and hopefully next time we can talk about strategies to
improve. Thank you all so much for listening to us at home. If you like this
podcast, please subscribe and like us on iTunes, Spotify, SoundCloud, or the
platform of your choice. And if you don't like this podcast, please don't do
anything. This podcast was recorded by the Microbial Bioinformatics Group and
edited by Nick Waters. The opinions expressed here are our own and do not
necessarily reflect the views of CDC or the Quadrant Institute.