Hello, and thank you for listening to the MicroBinFeed podcast. Here, we will be
discussing topics in microbial bioinformatics. We hope that we can give you some
insights, tips, and tricks along the way. There is so much information we all
know from working in the field, but nobody writes it down. There is no manual,
and it's assumed you'll pick it up. We hope to fill in a few of these gaps. My
co-hosts are Dr. Nabil Ali Khan and Dr. Andrew Page. I am Dr. Lee Katz. Both
Andrew and Nabil work in the Quadram Institute in Norwich, UK, where they work
on microbes in food and the impact on human health. I work at Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention and am an adjunct member at the University of
Georgia in the US. Welcome to the MicroBinFeed podcast. Today we're giving a
rapid roundup of what's been changing for SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19 genomics.
Things are changing very quickly. We should mention that it's the 19th of
February, 2021. Some of what we mention right now might change by the time you
hear this. Today, we're putting a spotlight on COVID-19 in Africa, and we're
joined by a very special guest, Peter Van Hursten, a bioinformatician at the
South African National Bioinformatics Institute. Peter has a systems
administration background and has moved over into the bioinformatics world.
Welcome, Peter. Thank you, Nabil. All right. And so let's get started with
reviewing the latest changes regarding the different variants of concerns. We'll
have a quick chat about BLEAK and FIDEL. So they identified the UK variant
B.1.1.7 with the E484K spike mutation there recently, and Ravi Gupta did a nice
little paper on that. And that was identified, I think, in Bristol, but it's
arisen a few times in the UK independently. People have come up with the name
BLEAK. You know, EAK is E484K. And they've said BLEAK. Well, I think it sounds
reasonable, you know, with the BLEAK one. But just give us a bit more info on
that. Is that actually just popping up like popcorn, or is it actually in
growing lineages? So there was an outbreak, like many linked cases, nearly
identical in one UK city. And then when they looked further, they saw that it is
coming up independently. So unfortunately, it obviously confers some kind of
advantage to the genome. And it's also in, you know, like the B.1.351 and in the
P.1 and P.2 lineages as well. So it is a bit of a problem, because I think
that's the one that's linked, that's a mutation that's linked to vaccine issues.
And it's causing some concern, I know, amongst people that the vaccines,
particularly like AstraZeneca and the like, aren't going to work as well. And I
believe South Africa have decided to hand back the AstraZeneca vaccine, haven't
they? It's been a bit complicated. It's now been announced, I think, that
they're going to donate them to the African Union. So what happened was that
there is actually a phase two arm of the AstraZeneca trial in South Africa.
There are only about 2000 people, I happen to be on it, actually, obviously, I
don't know whether I got the vaccine or the placebo. And then when they looked
at a sub-analysis, so they've been running this since last year. And then when
they looked at a sub-analysis, since the B.1.351 variant emerged, then it seemed
to lack efficacy against this new variant. However, I mean, I think that was
down to about 1000 odd people that's in both the placebo and the vaccine arms.
And the error bars were huge. I mean, I think that the 95% confidence interval
went everywhere from minus 40% to 50 something percent efficiency. In other
words, there is a chance that the vaccine will make you sick with COVID-19. That
doesn't make any sense whatsoever. But the thing is that basically because the
sample size was so small, this was designed as a as a phase two trial, which
really is a baseline efficacy and safety trial, not a real efficacy trial, like
a well powered phase three, then the results were really difficult to interpret.
And then the thing that was particularly concerning was that there was not
enough statistical power to tell you what's happening with regards to serious
disease. Also because the trial population, because it's phase two, was chosen
from generally healthy individuals. So these people would normally not get
severe COVID anyway. So I mean, I think the average age of a trial participants
in the 30s. And so we've got this big worry, but we don't really have enough
data to actually know how worried we should be. So it's all a bit nasty. Yeah,
I've been seeing a lot of conflicting reports on this one. It's definitely watch
the space until we get some something a bit more, more concrete. You can't
exactly do that while rolling out a vaccine, right? So no, I mean, I kind of
gave the vaccine back. Yeah, it does seem to be that nearly every day now we
have a new variant of concern or a variant under investigation. There's quite a
few now. I mean, the original UK variant, you know, is getting absolutely
everywhere now around the world. I see in Denmark, MADS has said it's 48% now of
their cases. And it seems to be in many European countries, it's similar kind of
trajectories, which isn't the best, you know, because obviously need much more
enhanced measures. But it's good now that people are kicking into gear with
sequencing and actually identifying it versus previously where, you know, it was
just, well, that's it, that's how it is. And so this week, we've had a few new
ones as well. We'll discuss some more later. But there's a B.1.525, which I
think is associated with Nigeria or travel to Nigeria. And then there's A.23.1,
which is associated or first discovered and described in Uganda. And then even
with us, like we did a bit of sequencing with Zimbabwe, and there's a C.2
lineage, which sounds interesting. So lots and lots of new potential variants of
concern arising absolutely everywhere around the world as we start looking for
them. And so all of those you've mentioned are all carrying the EEC change,
E484K, I think. Oh, well, some of them are, but some of them are carrying other
things and they don't really know what they're doing. All they know is that
these lineages have, you know, exploded and look pretty bad. So in our data,
we've been actually kind of hunting in the marginal data for E484K. So you know,
going out to read level 1x coverage, you know, what is actually in the sample in
our in Illumina data, you know, it can be dangerous to look at a single read and
try and make some kind of assessment on it. If you're doing, say, surge testing,
and you're trying to say you've identified one case in the community, and now
you want to see who else is around who might have that and then stop them and
stop the transmission chain from, you know, and stop it from spreading in the
community very quickly before it gets established. That is a reasonable way. And
it is worth looking for these very marginal samples at single reads. But you
know, would you be confident in a single read of Illumina? So looking at single
reads, where there's only one read coverage or single reads where the other
reads say something different? Single reads where you have one read coverage.
Now, generally, even in marginal samples, you'll have maybe two, three, four,
five reads. But to help with this, Public Health England have actually now
published different thresholds for different variants, you know, how many of the
lineage-defining mutations do you need to be able to call that as a low-quality
case, or a high-risk low-quality case. So they now have these kind of
definitions of really crappy data. But it's important, you know, when you're
trying, when you have a new variant of concern in an area, and it hasn't
established, and you want to kind of stamp it out quickly. So I mean, like, what
do you do if one acts like, is that reported as like a statistical measure so it
just helps out public health? Yeah, we would, I have reported some of these,
where you say, you might have, say, five or six defining mutations for a
lineage. And maybe they only have one X covering, one read covering each of
those. But the probability of all of those being in the same sample, like low-
coverage sample, at the same time is very low, you know, it's probability of all
being sequencing errors. So it's probably, there is that lineage, particularly
if it's not in the sequencing experiment you're doing already. So yeah, we have
called some of those, and we have highlighted them to public health, but as
high-risk, low-confidence data. So that poses a bunch of daunting challenges. So
firstly, you're not putting that into ZAID, right? I mean, that's just not going
to be the level of sample that you can put in a database. No, no, no, this is in
general, definitely not for general consumption. I was actually asked earlier
today, like, you know, about cutoffs for, you know, because we used to, you
know, bacteria with mixed infections and things like that. It's not something
that we really pay as much attention to in SARS-CoV-2, because we're not really
anticipating a lot of mixed infections, but, you know, normally something like
that would just get tossed out by the QC. Yeah, so most of that does get tossed
out. But if you have, say, 30, 40% of your samples failing to meet the GISAID
criteria, but you still want to get useful information out of those, you know,
they are still useful. And you can still call a lineage down to a very low level
of coverage. So it's about trying to make the best use of the data you have. And
that's in the case where you're sequencing everything you can get your hands on.
Do you have any particular tooling for identifying these things? Are you
eyeballing things in ITV? I mean, how do you, like, how do you put that into a
pipeline? So the very first step was MPILOP, right? To look for interesting
samples. And then TVIEW.  But then to a slightly more advanced step that Thang
on our team developed is he's basically done up spreadsheets and reports, and
it's quite simple then to just kind of scan very quickly and identify them. You
know, it takes like two seconds, you know, to pull them out because it's
particularly if you're looking, if you know particular mutations are
interesting. So the E404K being the example, it's not very common in the UK. So
finding it is, you know, it sets off alarm bells. Yeah. I think even, I think
this approach is, could be super useful for partial samples. I mean, maybe it
could be generalized to maybe something like 5X. I think, would you be
comfortable with 5X, Peter, if you had a tool that gave you like a partial,
very, you know, sort of couched prediction of the lineage? Because look, what is
your, your base error rate in Illumina? I mean, 5X would make me much more
confident, you know, but you know, the other thing I'm thinking is that this is
the kind of thing where you could perhaps be using this on sequencing from
sewage samples because you can get such faint traces. But if you're willing to
go that down, that deep down, might actually be an interesting early warning
system. I guess the sewage problem is that generally the fragments, the
amplicons don't really work as well. And people have been looking at smaller and
smaller amplicons to try and get more out of sewage because the RNA is, you
know, so degraded at that point. But yeah, you're right. I mean, pulling that
stuff out of sewage would be fun. Even asymptomatic cases where you don't have
that much viral load or even early on in the infection when it hasn't ramped up
that much. So here's an interesting thing. I was just looking at this B1.525
that was mentioned as the other interesting variant of concern that has been
seen in Nigeria, Denmark, UK. But besides the EAK, the E4K, there's a little bit
of a crossover here with the United States because I see that it's also got
QQ677H, which is in the birds, right? Birds? The birds. There are these
strangely named bird lineages that were announced in a preprint a few days ago.
Lee, you're a resident American. Could you answer this? I think that people have
tweeted about this now, so it's not really so secret anymore. It's just people
are kind of musing over using bird names for lineages instead of tying them to
geography or using these variant names to words like bleak. So they're thinking
about bird names. On that call, I suggested that maybe we need some bird
watchers to help us name some variants. I sort of volunteered my friend and
colleague, Jess Chen, for that because she loves bird watching and she is also a
biopharmacist. So the thing about these, if I recall the preprint, is that these
are... The reason they went with bird names is that we're talking about sub-
lineages, something going really down to like, we found this thing and then this
thing had this slight variation, but it's not enough to call a lineage yet. So
they basically are 677H or 677P in the spike protein. And then they had to come
up with... I mean, they couldn't keep coming up with even more numbers, so they
had to just give them nicknames for now. In the UK, we have UK lineages. So you
have the pangolin lineages like B117, but then we have UK lineages on top of
that. And then those go down into like .1, .2, .3, .4. So there's like thousands
upon thousands upon thousands. It's basically a numerical representation of a
phylogenetic tree, you know, each level down is another number, dot something.
And I think we'd run out of bird names very fast if we're doing that. I'm
surprised they didn't incorporate something similar. By the way, we're not meant
to call it pangolin lineages anymore because apparently the linen pangolin is
standing for lineage. So apparently they're now pango lineages, which sounds
like a word for computer game. So I think part of the story in the US as well
might be the involvement of Emma Hodcroft. And therefore they started with next-
gen clades and then dividing things within there instead of the pango lineages,
which tend to be a bit more fine grained. So all the birds are sitting either in
20G or 20B and then various kind of variations on a theme from there. But yeah,
it really causes problems for us. I mean, somebody was calling for the, what's
it called, the ICTV to give us names for things. Can you imagine if we had to
wait for the International Committee on the Taxonomy of Viruses, whatever they
called, I don't know if I got that acronym correctly, you know, can you imagine
if we had to wait for them to give us names? We'd be stuck forever. It is an
issue, isn't it? Because at the beginning, I think a lot of lineages were just
kind of people in under armpits keep going, oh yeah, that looks like a lineage,
there we go. But now they've had to try and formalize the process a little bit
more because there's so many lineages out there and it's just, there's an
explosion of diversity as time has gone on. Well, everyone has their own variant
of concern now. How does it pass the smell test with what you guys think about
with naming variants, with human-friendly names versus serial numbers versus
whatever with that last discussion we had? Well, I think the press need a name
they can use and they default to like South African variant and a UK variant.
And of course, those things are quite controversial. So Peter, can you tell us
what all the different versions of the names there are for the South African
variant, which is a name we shouldn't use because we don't want to link location
to a particular lineage or anything like that. Yes, ever since they misnamed the
Ebola virus after the wrong river. So it's 501YV2. It's also 20H slash 501YV2.
It's B.1.351. And I had to train myself to remember these things kind of the
same way that one remembers the keystrokes that you use in VI and it doesn't
mean anything. You just have muscle memory for it. It's so confusing, isn't it?
And you know, we're working in the area and it's confusing for us. I mean, God
help anyone who's maybe not working exactly in this area. They will just be
totally and utterly bamboozled. You mean like Lee? Yes, that is me right now.
But yeah, I'm still learning. It's fun. Look, the geographic name really falls
apart when you've got things like the Bleak, which is, you know, B.1.1.7 with a
twist of lemon or something like that. And then if you're going to call it the
UK variant, then what is Bleak? Because it's also from the UK. Well, actually,
the UK variant within the UK is called Kent variant because that's a place in
the UK. And then the Bleak is actually the Bristol variant. And all of these
birds, what variants are there? They're all USA variants. So yeah, but I mean,
the thing is, what also concerns me a little bit is when is a variant of concern
of concern? Because we heard for a while about some new results from California,
but it didn't seem to actually have a lot concerning about it. It looked like it
was actually just capturing a fairly accidental expansion through outbreaks. I
mean, you describe that in terms of Bleak, that Bleak was associated with a
particular outbreak. So if you have, you know, some kind of super spreader
event, it can look like the expansion of a viral lineage. But you know, it used
to be that we would pour cold water on that and tell people that, you know,
viruses mutate. But now it seems that we're super scared and every little blip,
we get worried about it. Every long branch in a tree, we get very worried, I
think. Long branches is a different story. So I mean, for instance, there's been
a report now from some in the US about a recombination event. And that is stuff
to worry about, because we've suddenly got the selective landscape of the virus
is being explored much faster than we thought it was just accumulating two
variants a month or something like that. And now suddenly this thing is jumping
and that that is something to worry about. Now I know recombination can occur,
but we have to be very careful with this. If people are just basing it purely on
sequencing data, I'd want to see like the underlying reads and I'd want to see
if recombination has occurred, you know, two mutations occurring on a single
high quality read, this kind of thing. If it's just someone has gone to GISAID
and then found a really interesting sequence with lots of mutations in it, then
I'd be very worried because that, you know, could just be contamination. It
might just have been two different ninjas on the same experiment on the same
sequencing run and there's, you know, bit of cross contamination or maybe
someone that was infected with two different strains or some, you know,
something like that. But I'd be very concerned without seeing the actual
underlying data and without someone having grown it, you know, maybe I'm just
skeptical in my old age, but I've seen so much contamination now that I really
do want to see the data before believing these kind of things have happened. And
I know that we're trying to be careful over on our side too. If anybody sees a
variant, then it's like double check, triple check anything. And we have to be
very sure before like the media hears like CDC reports a new variant, like we
don't want any overreaction. Yeah. Especially since you are CDC, but I mean,
yeah, this came into the media via somebody giving a presentation on an online
webinar that doesn't seem to have a recording anyway. So definitely I think
caution is merited. But the other thing is that people are now looking for more
things and we're going to see more things. And I mean, that's actually
encouraging. I mean, the fact that we're finally seeing the U.S. getting
organized and hopefully putting something much bigger scale than the previously
kind of academic based sequencing and small scale.  public health sequencing in
place. And on the African continent as well, we've seen a push in very difficult
circumstances to actually like do surveillance. Last year, we had a lot of first
viruses. You know, we've the first sample from, you know, some other place and
that wasn't always sustainable. That's amazing. I mean, that's always the case,
right? You always have for any new process or technology, there's this prototype
foundation bit and that's actually fairly easy to knock out. And then going back
and trying to make it routine is a massive undertaking and that's taking time.
And, but we're starting to see that come online, but only now. It's almost like
nobody took us seriously before. Why sequence this virus? There's no variation.
Why bother? So maybe we'll move on to Africa because there's been a lot coming
out of there in the past two weeks. So Peter, do you want to give us kind of a
quick roundup of what the major papers have been and what major things have come
out? So there's been some continuation of what already started and then some new
work that's quite interesting. So let me start with the continuation. I think we
have to credit groups in Kenya at Camry for getting a sampling and sequencing
effort, not producing a huge amount of data, but doing it relatively
consistently since last year. And the same in Ghana, we've seen an effort to at
least drop sequence every couple of months or something like that. I know it's
not the scale that we'd like to see, but it's at least continuous. And then in
Uganda as well, the group at UVRI around Matt Cotton and others has been showing
that like previous investments into these places, it's paying off.
Unfortunately, we've also had a few kind of stalled processes where I know one
group, I won't mention the group or the country, they basically ran out of
reagents and therefore they'd started some really good surveillance. They had
the skills and then they couldn't continue at the pace that they started at. And
I know that something like that has happened in more than one place. So there
was some shortages related to shopping constraints earlier in the pandemic, but
also a lot of people use their research funds to do some of the initial work.
And then when those dried up, they weren't always replenished. So it's real
challenge that like, what is the relationship between academic research groups
that are trying to help and actually kind of sustaining things from maybe your
local ministry of health or something like that. But then besides that, we've
seen the expansion of the B.1.351 variant northwards. I heard most recently, I
have first heard about it from Botswana and then Zambia, a big drop of sequences
from Dan Bridges' lab in Zambia showing that it was very, very common. And I
think you said there's something in Zimbabwe now as well. Yeah, we did
sequencing with Zimbabwe for December and January, and we found a lot, like it
is absolutely the most dominant strain. I think in December is about 60%. And
now it's about 90% in Zimbabwe. So it's overwhelming. And the so-called second
wave in Zimbabwe from what I've heard has been quite brutal. Unfortunately, some
very prominent physicians passing away. Yeah. And hopefully they'll get that
under control soon. But we have also observed other lineages there. So the A23.1
was observed as well. And then kind of a novel one as well, we've seen as well,
which we're just investigating at the moment, which has a 501T mutation, which
people have seen in mink before, but that's popped up with a few other little
mutations. So we don't know what's going on there. Well, I hope that you will be
able to carry on sequencing on a regular basis, either within Zimbabwe or by
shipping samples out. Yeah, the A23.1, which makes up the majority of sequences
in Uganda is interesting because it's a place where we haven't. And similarly,
the results that I heard from Kenya yesterday at the WHO seminar was that they
haven't seen the either B.1.351 or B.1.1.7 taking over in those places. So
something about the travel restrictions is perhaps having an impact. Yeah,
that's always the interesting thing. Dawn of the spread is always a human story,
isn't it? Yeah. So one of the things is basically different regimes for how
people are being checked at the border or not. The presentation from Ghana that
I heard yesterday was that B.1.1.7 was very prevalent there in community and in
travelers. So it seems that West Africa, there's a lot of B.1.1.7 going around.
And a friend of mine was actually asking me, well, which variant's gonna win? I
mean, it's kind of a little bit like alien versus predator, you know, whoever
wins, we lose, right? But just given the volume of travel, that really is the
story of the variants, right? So generally people are more connected with these
places like Dubai or the UK or Europe where there's lots of flights back and
forth. If things come from South Africa to the Southern African region, they're
probably coming via road. Yeah, that's the interesting thing about pathogens is
they tell us a lot more about our human migrations more than anything. And when
this is all done and dusted, it'll be interesting to go back and see how people
actually move using the virus as a marker. It's very interesting that we're
doing sequencing in different places because we're now connecting the dots. So
we noticed a little cluster in Zimbabwe data and actually it looks like that's
kind of the source, the reservoir for this particular lineage. And it's been
seen in a few other cases around the world in travelers. We guessed they're
travelers, you know, popping up in like 10 different countries. And it's only by
sequencing, you know, broadly across the globe that we're actually going to see
where is the actual source of these things rather than just kind of sporadic
things popping up magically. And we really do need to have surveillance just
absolutely everywhere. We don't have to have much, but just, you know, a little
bit to kind of catch these things because at the moment we're totally blind in
huge parts of the world. Yeah, I was just playing around with some of those
numbers going back to the country of isolation from the GISAID database and just
tabulating all of those. And then found that of all of the GISAID data, 4.4% of
them are from LMICs. Obviously the bulk of it is from the UK and then the US and
then Denmark and then, but otherwise very, very small proportions coming from
LMICs. Does everyone know what LMIC is? I'll pretend I don't, tell us. Oh, at
low middle income countries. Yeah, which makes up the majority of the world's
population. So, I mean, I must admit, by the way, in terms of hearing about
Denmark, I must congratulate Mads Olbertson for a very, very efficient use of
nanopore sequences. I saw a photo from his lab a while back and it was just, you
know, nanopore sequences on every flat surface. And again, that was the example
of somebody whose real strength before this thing was metagenomics, just
pivoting towards viral sequencing and doing a great job. Yep, I'll have to say
South Africa comes at number two as the LMIC with the most sequences provided.
Who's number one? India. Ah, that's good. So, and in fact, have we been looking
at the variant landscape in India? I don't think so. I haven't paid much
attention, but I mean, obviously there should be, this is just absolute count. I
mean, as a proportion of population, it's a completely different story where
the, what would come up. That is true. There has been some interesting work from
India that I've been tracking. I haven't been looking at it very closely, but
like in South Africa, some parts of India have reported very, very high
seroprevalence, you know, 40% seroprevalence in some low-income neighborhoods.
Same thing coming out of Ghana, especially in the low-income areas. We're seeing
this virus has been kind of ripping to the neighborhood, but sometimes luckily
not with a severe disease, perhaps because of the age profile of the
populations. But yeah, definitely there's a lot to learn around the world from
Brazil, from Indonesian archipelago, from India and elsewhere. So it just shows,
I think also, that there's a bit of a Western as well as kind of Anglophone bias
to how these kinds of conversations are happening. You know, I don't speak
Portuguese and I can barely get by in French. That's all the time we have for
today. We've been talking SARS-CoV-2 with some special attention to what's up in
Africa. And I want to thank Peter for joining us today. And thanks everyone else
for listening. Thank you all so much for listening to us at home. Please
subscribe and like us on iTunes, Spotify, SoundCloud, or the platform of your
choice. And if you don't like this podcast, please don't do anything. This
podcast was recorded by the Microbial Bioinformatics Group and edited by Nick
Waters. The opinions expressed here are our own and do not necessarily reflect
the views of CDC or the Quadrant Institute.