Hello and thank you for listening to the MicroBinfeed podcast. Here we will be
discussing topics in microbial bioinformatics. We hope that we can give you some
insights, tips, and tricks along the way. There's so much information we all
know from working in the field, but nobody really writes it down, there's no
manual, and it is assumed you'll pick it up. We hope to fill in a few of these
gaps. My co-hosts are Dr. Nabeel Ali Khan of Enterobase, GrapeTree, and
BrakeFame, and Dr. Andrew Page of such works as Plasmatron 5000, Rory, and
Govens. I am Dr. Lee Katz, and you might know me from my Tree Making Pipeline
Mastery or my SNP Pipeline Live Set. Both Nabeel and Andrew work at the Quadram
Institute in Norwich, UK, where we work on microbes in food and the impact on
human health. I work at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and am an
adjunct professor at the University of Georgia in the U.S. Today we're going to
be talking about surveillance platforms, reference lab characterization,
bacterial profiling methods, and just kind of overall the mechanics of how we
talk to each other. So in the past, people have used a number of different
approaches to sort of define different types of microbes that they're seeing out
in the environment. So there's such approaches like plasma typing, phage typing,
or serotyping, which is sort of based around susceptibility or like
morphological changes, or there are other approaches which are based around
genotyping. So such things like postural gel electrophoresis or MILVA, which is
looking at microsatellites, or MLST, which is looking at multiple housekeeping
genes across the genome. Yeah, so I find this a bit odd because I come from the
NGS era, like I'm an NGS boy. I only came to genomics in 2011, so all of this is
like really obscure to me. I've never done any of this. I'm a computer
scientist, so I haven't learned it in university, but it's really fascinating
because it still lives on. These are classic techniques which have stood the
test of time. Yeah, so a number of these sort of tests, like for instance
serotyping, at least for Salmonella, still is a gold standard for reporting. And
things like MILVA, I think they use internally within the ECDC for reporting.
PFG, which I think is still in use as well. They're all very ... The idea with
these methods, for a few of them, is they're supposed to be very quick or very
reliable methods of just defining what sample you've got so you can tell someone
else. But at a very high level, yeah? But at a very high level. And a lot of
these methods don't strictly correspond to what you would see if you were
looking at the whole genome, since they're based on the idea that you're looking
at phage typing, which is you're infecting with different phages and seeing how
the cells react to it, doesn't strictly have anything to do with the overall
phylogeny of a genome. But I suppose it does allow you to rule some things in
and out of an outbreak. If you've got a hospital with two different types
circulating, then you can have a rough idea, okay, it's not one big outbreak,
it's two or three. Exactly. And before, you only really had Sanger sequencing as
a method, so this was good enough. Yeah, it's still good enough even today to
use for just that sort of simple application. I suppose it's one step above just
going to your doctor and you cough and he's like, oh well, this is probably
staph aureus. You're thinking, how on earth has he come to that conclusion just
by one cough or some vague symptoms without actually doing a proper diagnostic
test? I'd say some of these tests are quite robust. It's sort of interesting
with some of the methods, again with PFG, it will give you fairly high
discriminant power because it's taking all of the DNA that's in the chromosome
and doing the restriction digest on it. And that fanning pattern, it's a pan-
genomic measure of the genome. And that's good, high-fidelity data that you can
use. And you can share the banding patterns that you've generated are
consistent, the protocol's consistent, so you can show that to your friend and
that can make sense. And I've seen trees built with PFG, how do they compare to
when you do whole genome sequencing? Yeah, if we're talking about data, if we're
talking about genomes or strains that are very closely related and you're trying
to say if it's more or less identical, maybe you can comment on how comparable
the PFG is to say like a clonal complex or serotype or some other normal
measure. Yeah, those are good questions. So PFGE is really tough to link back to
WGS. I don't want to scoop anybody, but I just know that there is some research
right now trying to compare PFGE back to WGS. Unfortunately, it's not like a
one-to-one because PFGE cuts in certain spots in the genome, but then that's not
at a defined restriction site. But that's not a hard and fast rule because
certain things like methylation might block the restriction enzyme. And so you
can't just predict the bands actually from a complete genome. That said, another
question you had was how do we make trees out of PFG? And it's actually very
simplistic. Usually the restriction enzymes are picked so that you see about 15
different bands on the gel per genome. And it's basically a distance matrix
between different genomes where you have a distance of either 0 to 15 bands. And
so that distance matrix can be turned into a tree. A lot of times that tree
corresponds with what the WGS tree would be, but then other times it would not.
For example, Salmonella Newport can probably be turned in, which has basically
certain PFGE types, would actually turn into about three different, I think,
three different WGS clades. And you can go from there. PFG can be blown apart in
WGS clades, or different PFG profiles can be collapsed into one WGS type. It's
kind of interesting. There's a few publications I can think of that discuss some
of the differences between PFG and whole genome sequencing can be because of
different, say, phage that have infected a strain. And then that adds different
genomic content, which then alters the PFG banding pattern. And that might
accidentally leave you to think that it's more closely related to one other
strain than you would to the one that it's supposed to be. This would be like as
if you just, say, took every single SNP or took every single gene and considered
that as part of your tree, and it'll give you a funny result. You can get the
same sort of problem with PFG. So I know that in the U.S., especially with
PulseNet in the early 90s, they started using PFGE. Were they doing things like
MILVA in Europe? So from what I remember reading, and I might be wrong, but I
think MILVA is the standard reporting method between different nations within
the ECDC. Okay. So they would flag as soon as that, if someone's like, oh, we're
seeing the same MILVA type several times, they would send a broadcast out that
this is what's going on. This is what they're seeing. And they'd ask, has anyone
else seen the same thing? And I think in the literature, you'll see that, yes,
they select, they actually select based on MILVA. And then that is used to
inform what they will then go and look in deeper with, like, say, whole genome
sequencing. Yeah. You know what? We actually use PFGE and then as a secondary
analysis use MILVA when we were selecting which whole genome sequences to use
for the Haiti Cholera Project. When we were trying to use genomes early on 2011,
2013, to look at that outbreak. And it's sort of a chicken and egg problem. You
have to know what the diversity is before you run WGS, at least back then when
resources were tight. And so we actually sequenced a diversity of PFGE and MILVA
types. But then this sort of brings us to the question of, this is still, I
mean, you were using it back in those days, but you're still like the standard
today, more or less. And why, what is the stopping points between moving from
this to whole genome approaches then? We're slowly moving forward on that. We, I
think that we have officially flipped the switch now so that labs are supposed
to be running whole genome sequencing. They aren't being stopped from running
PFGE, but we are coordinating on WGS now, at least for a few different
organisms.  Which organisms did I eat? We started with Listeria in 2013, which
we were expecting something like 1,600 isolates from various agencies per year,
but it was a bigger feat to go to Salmonella, which is in the tens of thousands,
and I believe that's the same over there with you guys. It was more difficult.
We had sort of a tipping point last year where we were getting more WGS than
PFGE, and I think now we are getting basically majority or hopefully virtually
all WGS on Salmonella, and hopefully also on Escherichia, although I'm not
totally up to date on that. And are those all made publicly available through
the NCBI? Yeah. All of our labs are now submitting directly to NCBI, and so you
can see those in the bioprojects on ncbi.nlm.nih.gov slash pathogens, and you
can see under contributors which bioprojects people are contributing from.
Sometimes just because of patient confidentiality, we are masking, and so you
can't really... These are anonymized, so we can at least use it for
surveillance, but you can't track it back to the patient. And then through the
collaboration between NCBI and ENA, those genomes are being constantly
synchronized between the two agencies, and so they are downloadable from each
database. So really, what is the difference? Why do we even want to share or
talk about surveillance for different microbes? That's a great question, Nabil.
We use these different profiling techniques for things, especially like linking
outbreaks. Even back when we only had seven genome LST, these were being used to
describe which organisms had the same sequence type, and we could tell... We
could incorporate that into an outbreak definition like this. For example, a
fictitious outbreak might have all of sequence type 11 and must be found in this
boarding school where everybody was sharing the same airspace, and so that might
be a meningitis outbreak. So it was important to know at least the seven genome
LST at that time, but it didn't have as good resolution, and obviously WGS does
a whole lot better job. A lot of other things can be derived from just using
profiling. You can profile, for example, virulence genes, and a subset of that
might be... You might consider a subset of virulence genes to be antimicrobial
resistance genes, and so those could be determined just from analyzing the DNA
of the organism. I don't know. Certain things like seven genome LST might help
you define what the host niche is. For example, meningococcus sequence type 32
for the longest time, if you found that in the US, I know that that would be
something that was almost definitely from the northwestern region of the US.
Some of my PhD work that just stuck with me for years. Yeah, I think in terms of
host niche, definitely like geographic, different serotypes of E. coli,
particularly for enterohemorrhagic E. coli is found in different locations
around the world with different sort of clinical prevalence. Same thing applies
with phage typing for a lot of species. You can see for some cases, certain STs
are certain, any of these genotypic measures will put them into certain animals
or certain environments as well. You can find a lot of literature where people
have just gone through with these typing methods and then tried to correlate it
back to where they found it and in what context, whether it was part of an
outbreak or whether it wasn't. A lot of that still holds, I think. I think we
should be fair on it, even with whole genome sequencing coming and redefining
everything. A lot of the gems that come out of those old papers are still true
or still make sense. Yeah, I guess they are gems because it's like, I feel like
now we're kind of like tied into WGS and we want to look at everything WGS and
why are people looking at phage typing. But when you read these old papers, it's
like, you read about the phage typing and that really does help out. Actually,
there was a, for plasma typing, do you guys know the story of the Rajneeshee?
No. Tell us. There was an outbreak that was kept secret for years, actually, in
northwestern United States. There was a city where there was an Indian cult
called the Rajneeshee and they wanted to basically give everyone food poisoning
on the day of an election and take over the town. They would be running and they
would take over the town. This was actually the first case of a bioterrorism
attack in the U.S. They had cult members working in like 15 different
restaurants or something and they decided to poison the food on the same day.
And what happened? I think that they basically didn't get the incubation time
correct and everyone got sick on the wrong day and they still were voted out of
office and they were still investigated later. So tying this back into the
conversation, they actually figured out who caused the outbreak through plasmid
typing. They found that the Rajneeshee ordered an ATCC strain that had a unique
plasmid in it and they compared the plasmid of the outbreak versus ATCC and who
bought this strain and they looked in the basement of basically this cult
compound and found it incubating in there. So that's pretty clever the way they
traced that back. So that was kept secret for years and I don't even know when
it was made public. I'm sure we can look that up. My co-PI when I was in grad
school told me about it and I didn't quite believe him. And then I saw it on one
of my favorite shows, Forensic Files, and somebody at CDC who I know very well
was interviewed on there and he was describing it. So I know that that's public
now and there's a whole Wikipedia article on it and everything. I think that
that's all to say that plasmid typing and phage typing, just like you were
saying Nabil, is incredibly useful. We want to do everything WGS, but we have to
understand that these classic methods really were very useful. And what about
things like multituff? Are you guys using that in the US? We are using it, but I
don't want to comment too much on it myself because I'm not involved in it too
much and I don't know much about it. I do know that it's incredibly useful.
There's an expensive machine, but when you look at each sample, it costs
something like 10 to 50 cents for each sample to run it. It's incredibly useful
too. In the UK, actually something they use a lot is antibiograms. So just what
grows and what doesn't, just the antibiotic resistance profile. And they use
that in hospitals just to track different outbreaks because they will have
different antibiotic resistance profiles and they can tell what's in and what's
out. It's kind of a neat way of doing it. Although we're going back to Louis
Pasteur days. How do you mean it goes back to Pasteur days with that?
Essentially, if you're just growing up some bacteria on a plate and then seeing
what grows, what doesn't grow, that's quite old school. Yeah. Okay. But it
works. It's very definitive apart from intermediate. That's cool. Okay. So next
in our notes, we wanted to talk about the federation and data sharing in pre-
genomics land. For example, how do we coordinate across institutions and
internationally? And I feel like what I'm going to do, what I'm about to do is
be very U.S. centric. And I hope that you guys step in and tell me what else is
happening in the rest of the world too. So I can say that pulse net is a major
way that we coordinate across institutions and internationally, at least across
laboratories. Pulse net basically started officially in 1996 based on an
outbreak that I believe was in 1993 in the Western region of the U.S. There was
a fast food chain that is named, but I won't name it here. There's no point in
pointing fingers on this podcast, but there was an E. coli outbreak. There was
basically hamburgers that had sugar toxin producing E. coli and they weren't
being cooked all the way sometimes. And basically little kids were getting
really bad E. coli. I think Oregon, Washington, California, I'm forgetting one
more state, I believe maybe it was Novato started coordinating and they created
kind of the seed behind pulse net. And over time it became more centralized in
Atlanta at CDC. And so over time, more and more states.  came on board.
Presently, there are more than 80 labs in the US for PulseNet. And PulseNet
itself has grown out of the US to create an international consortium called
PulseNet International. And so they do coordinate, they've historically
coordinated with MILVA and PFGE as standard reporting systems. They've used
Bionumerics kind of as the platform for coordinating these results. And at that
time, PulseNet was one of the largest platforms and movements and whatever you
want to call it for syndication. Well, I'd like to know, how does PulseNet fit
into GenomeTracker? GenomeTracker is this really awesome initiative put forward
by FDA. And it's a post genomics initiative. Whereas PulseNet, even its name
gets its name from PulseGel electrophoresis. It is a pre genomics platform. So
PulseNet was basically is basically coordinating with PFGE patterns, and is now
coordinating with WGS workflows. GenomeTracker was FDA's initiative to get their
their local laboratories on board for sending them WGS and for analyzing it
centrally and for uploading it to NCBI centrally. GenomeTracker has used NCBI as
its platform. GenomeTracker has recently expanded to Galaxy Tracker, which is
based off of Galaxy. Galaxy is awesome. That's what we're using here at
Quadrant. Okay, how do you guys use it? I'm always for everything. It's, it is
the way forward. I think it's a great system that just works for if you want to
build a bioinformatics workflow, you know, you point and click. And it's very,
very scalable. It works in a cloud or works in a local HPC cluster. And we're
using it with a system called IRIDA, which is a Canadian, originally a Canadian
system for infectious diseases. Nabil knows probably more about this than I do.
Yeah, so IRIDA, we're using that mainly for the data management and launching
some simple, some of the simpler standardized pipelines to, to that resource.
And the idea is that you'll have your data on IRIDA, which you can then link
into Galaxy and then do more advanced complicated workflows that you that a user
generates themselves. So it gives a good flexibility of standard issue results
that you can sort of the reliable results. And then you might want to go and do
your own bespoke thing to follow up from that. So between the two, you've got
that you've got the flexibility to kind of go to either avenue. Are you guys
making any like custom workflows that that could turn into something more
centralized with you and your partners? Well, we're putting that up on GitHub at
the moment. That was what I was working on today. Yeah, so slowly, slowly, we'll
have more of our pipelines, like readily available. So people can, we can always
point to that of this is how we do our analysis. And then they can actually just
download it and use it themselves within these within these frameworks. And
also, it's a great way for labs around the world to share validated workflows,
or published workflows, you know, there's nothing worse than reinventing the
wheel. And I guess that's one way we can all collaborate and share our
Bonformatics knowledge. That's great. And so I don't know if your repo is
private at this time, or if you'd like to publicize it here. What, where can
people look at your code for this? I'll add to the show notes. And I think that
you guys were just at a galaxy tracker conference. Yeah, I'm just back from a
galaxy PI meeting. So galaxy is huge community. And it's the major players be
Penn State and Johns Hopkins and Freiburg University. And everyone got together,
I think there's about 25 PIs in a room, just discussing the future directions of
galaxy, you know, it's been around for a while. And it's going from strength to
strength, there's 10s of 1000s of people using it on a daily basis. So it's it's
fairly well established out there. And a lot of companies use it as well. So
some of these fancy websites to go to would for commercial companies actually
are just running galaxy underneath and open source tools. And you can get all
the same functionality, essentially, just by going and downloading galaxy or if
you want to try it out, there's different containers. That's cool. And so also
tying it back to kind of kind of our wheelhouse for kind of, I would say kind of
genomic epidemiology, are there any like main tools that you guys looked at
during your conference or that you look at now at quadram? Well, the system
we're using is Irida, what is this integrated rapid infectious disease
something. And it's, it's basically built for genomic epidemiology from the
point of view, you know, bacterial pathogens. And that's what we're using it
for. But we're kind of extending it into the next generation, third generation,
allowing it to support like nanopore impact bio and that kind of thing. So
there's a lot of tools out there and you can drop stuff in and get working very,
very fast. It's amazing. It's democratized the bioinformatics analysis of
bacteria. And anybody can jump in fairly quickly and start doing high quality
research and outbreak investigation. That's cool. So do you think that quadram
and several, several other places are jumping on Irida? It's a Canadian project.
And, and I know that they have been trying to broadcast it out. Yeah, they have,
they do have some, they do have a slowly growing user base. There are a couple
of chaps around outside of Canada who have started to use it for some of their
projects as well. Okay, we have it installed at CDC too. I need to use it more,
but it is an awesome project. I agree with you. You know, one more, you named
all the universities. I remember actually, Emory University had James Taylor,
but he moved away a few years ago to Johns Hopkins. Yeah. So he's one of the
main guys at the Galaxy conference as well. And he is at Johns Hopkins and he's
still leading the Galaxy project there. And it's gone from strength to strength.
Yeah, it's a huge loss for us in Atlanta. What can you do? Nothing. But I do
know the University of Georgia as well uses Galaxy quite extensively as well.
Oh, wow. Were they represented at the conference? Oh, absolutely. They were.
Yeah. That's great. University of Georgia is really excelling now in
bioinformatics. It's always excelling. Sorry. But it's going it's going better
in bioinformatics now. Well, you work there, don't you? Or you're an adjunct?
I'm not at the main campus or any campus at all, really, but I'm an adjunct
associated with a satellite campus, which in that campus is associated with food
safety. So the main campus is, I think, an hour east of Atlanta. The campus I'm
associated with is an hour south. So a little call out to the Center for Food
Safety at the University of Georgia. Well, this has been a great conversation so
far going into the history of typing and covering topics such as PFG, MLSC,
plasma typing and PulseNet right up to the present day with Genome Tracker. Join
us again, where we will continue on this journey into the history of genotyping.
Thank you all so much for listening to us at home. If you like this podcast,
please subscribe and like us on iTunes or Google Play. And if you don't like the
podcast, please don't do anything. This podcast was recorded by the Microbial
Bioinformatics Group. The opinions expressed here are our own and do not
necessarily reflect the views of CDC or the Quadram Institute.