Hello, it has been more than a year since we started the podcast and we wanted
to record this special episode on the origins of the podcast. How do we meet?
Why do we do it? How do we do it? So to kick us off guys How do we know each
other? You want to start Andrew? Yeah, so I guess I first met Nabil many years
ago at a hackathon randomly in Warwick and actually that was the first place I
learned to play the game Pandemic which is quite relevant for these days But
anyway, we had a hackathon for MRC Climb and that's how we got to know each
other, you know And following on from that we met at various different events
over the years, different hackathons, conferences You know, you just bump into
people but it was a very small world and also then out of one of those
hackathons A slack group was set up and we kept in touch And then Lee, I think I
know you from that slack group as well yeah, I was very fortunate you guys
invited me as I think the first American On that one so I was able to get in
very early. I'm very fortunate. Well, we had some Canadians. Does that count?
Okay, fine so I wasn't the first North American actually, but First person from
from my country. I appreciate that the token American Yeah, as Andrew said
that's that's how we met and I think I met you Lee It was some Enterbase
PulseNet work and I was trying to get in touch with the bioinformatician behind
CDC who knew Stuff of what was going on with the data. They were submitting to
the short read archive yep, and and I got your email and I think I was more or
less disappointed Because I didn't know enough to help solve the problem But we
started off a good email correspondence And then when we started the slack board
when I was invited to the site where you all started I saw you on there. We were
able to talk more on there Yeah, I mean we I think we had a lot of discussion
backwards and forwards on some of the cgmst snip stuff and all of that so Yeah,
and so that was that was like several years ago and we only actually physically
met last year at AVPHM So it's been it's been a mostly virtual cyber
relationship That's random because you know, we had a paper together, you know
in what 2017? Yeah, so we hadn't actually met I mean, it's it's often that you
know your collaborators on a paper and you don't meet but I think we work pretty
closely All three of us on that one And yeah, never met Lee at that point And
that paper grew out of a just a random slack discussion it was a Was it a horse
race between all the different MLSC pieces of software see which one actually
works which doesn't You know and kind of test them in and out and then we'll
throw all of our knowledge into one little paper And then bang a few weeks
later. We had something Yeah, pretty much It was a great paper. Thanks for
getting us together on that In fact, I think we went so quickly that the CDC
clearance couldn't even keep up Yeah, so in all of our different discussions and
so on there's often these conversations through virtually on slack or physically
at the bar or whatever where you Meet up and you talk and you have great ideas
and one of those is the MLSC paper that actually turned into something but then
there's a lot of other ideas that just sort of don't get discussed a lot of
secrets a lot of tips and from that we wanted to capture that and that's where
We wanted to have a format where we could actually put all of these different
ideas into Something that had some permanence that other people can learn from
as well as we as we learned And there's so much information out there, you know
You've got reddit and bio stars and loads of different places to find
information about mathematics But it's all totally distributed and there's so
much insider knowledge That everyone just kind of assumes, you know But most of
it isn't written down at all And you just have to embed yourself within the
community for quite a long time before you actually realize What's going on and
what all the nuances are so having a podcast format or something like that does
really really help Yeah, I mean originally I think we wanted something written
down like a blog or a zine like a little magazine print pdf thing I suppose it
was just a lot of effort to kind of draft something. It was too formal and It
was difficult to draft something that we could Write up and turn around pretty
quickly because things change pretty fast as well and so we we settled on the
podcast format because it at least allowed us to Discuss go backwards and
forwards have guests on and have a dynamic discussion because often at a
conference That's really where you learn the most is when you grab someone a
coffee and you ask them about something and they tell you something That wasn't
in the poster that wasn't in the seminar and that's where the penny drops and
you realize ah That's how I do this for my work so even before that we had a
virtual lab talk series that Lee and myself were chairing and I was uh, we would
Do it live over zoom and then we'd take questions Uh live as well for the
presenters But we would also record it and put onto youtube So that was kind of
our dipping our toes into the water for our first kind of Public engagement
spreading the knowledge, but it was quite difficult to keep that up, wasn't it?
Yeah, that was really fun. I gotta say and um, we can get into that more later
with our conference We did but it was really fun. It was we would record about
Two three different talks at a time separate them out put them on youtube and we
have a nice youtube list Where anybody can go back and listen to the talks now?
so we got a yeah, we did dip our toes into how to Record and and get people
talking best One interesting phrase that I got from unibill from this This is
just kind of an aside is that you say meet space and I like that phrase a lot
Yeah, meet space hardly any meet space interaction these days but I think I
think with the virtual lab talks what proved to be from the outside looking in
was part of the difficulty was It's it's a formal seminar. So people were trying
we're always giving published results or polished talks and part of it is and
that that's really important that that we disseminate that kind of knowledge,
but But then it sort of discourages the casual conversations. We were having in
the in the slack or at meetings and so on We are all people who love podcasts
actually Even before we started this. So what podcasts kind of Are influential
for you guys? So for me, I really like the bbc podcast. So the curious cases of
rutherford and fry And then there's the infant monkey cage. So kind of sciencey
podcasts But then you know, I also like the more True crime and history as well
What about you lee? I think I got my my toes wet with with things like from npr
like how I built this or planet money But also there are the science podcasts
like science friday also food safety talk And I and I also had one that was done
by a friend called The newberry tart and she just talks about kids books on
there I really like the way that those speakers organize their podcasts and I
and I like the topics I think for me I actually don't listen to that many
podcasts. I don't listen to any regularly actually I just even listen to our
podcast sometimes And I haven't subscribed at least on spotify. Well, that's
good. That's good first step But but I do consume a lot of I do consume a lot of
content on on youtube Which has which is and a lot of that format is basically a
video version of a podcast Where someone's just talking about a topic and that
was reassuring for me because that kind of showed me that no matter what you
want to talk about if you Have something interesting to say you will find an
audience absolutely, and I think one of the key points of this podcast is that
we wanted to have a niche and serve a little niche because We we don't want to
do a general like microbiology podcast or general bioinformatics podcast because
those things exist already You know, we wanted to have a narrow focus basically
Our little area and what we enjoy doing ourselves and what we would talk about
if we're out after a conference or over a cup of coffee, whatever so That was a
key category we wanted to fill yeah, that's always the frustrating thing is that
the devil is in the details and when you try to zoom out and you talk about
Bioinformatics even if you say weed mapping it's different if you're doing human
versus microbe versus other organisms and then that Vagueness you have to
introduce to keep it accurate then means that you don't you can't say anything
definitive and it sort of Gets a bit dry But here we can really take a
particular problem and tease it apart and talk in depth about something And with
and that's our background of course as well I think it'd be really hard for us
to field bioinformatics if we were talking about bioinformatics generally with
Would say what happens in human populations or something like that God, that's
too hard. You know, it's a massive genome. Yeah, and it's like diploid like this
is that kind of redundancy is unnecessary And then you get into plants my god,
you know, you got wheat and it's crazy number of copies of everything Yeah There
are other bioinformatics podcasts out there that I listen to and the topics on
there I listen to them because I don't know the topics and  and they teach me
stuff, like the bioinformatics chat. My hat's off to you all, other people who
do these other podcasts that these other niches that I just cannot cover, that
we can't cover. Yeah, definitely bioinformatics chat is worth a listen. That was
one that I put on every now and again. So how did we kind of prepare for our
format? You guys have some thoughts on that? Well, I think we geared up for a
few months beforehand, you know, we really needed to talk ourselves into it.
That's true. Lee, did you talk to anyone in the social media space? Well, I
talked to a couple of people that I knew are podcast hosts. I ran into Ben
Chapman from Food Safety Talk, for example, at the International Association for
Food Protection meeting in 2018, I think, and he gave me, he was more than
gracious, he gave me so many tips, and we just talked over beers and meat space,
and he didn't even mind that I was taking notes in Slack and typing them to you
guys as he was talking to me, and he just gave me so many good tips. One of the
tips was, you know, just have an ongoing Google Docs folder or an instant
message as we're talking and recording, so that we have this alternate method of
communication and something to read as we're going, which is exactly what we
have right now. Yes. I talked to my friend Jenny Law, who hosts the Newberry
Tart podcast on children's books, and she just kind of went over their flow, how
they might edit things, and just kind of that space. I talked to my brother who
works in social media, hi Jeff, and he gave me some good tips some ideas for
what to do, he gave me feedback on our first recording and editing, some good
tips. And the boring part that I had to go through was CDC ethics. So I think
for maybe half a year, maybe up to a year, I went to CDC ethics and described
what I was going to be doing, how can I clear this, make sure that I'm not
saying the wrong things, what are the wrong things to do that I need to avoid.
They actually codify what the ethics are, and I have to sign it, and my
supervisor has to sign it, and all that stuff. So it's in writing, and I renew
it every single year. But the danger is if I express something over here, and if
we didn't have the disclaimer at the end of every episode that these are not the
opinions of CDC, and despite that, even if I went, you know, overboard and told
you things like aliens are reading our minds that... Careful now. Yeah, I'd have
to be incredibly careful not to say the wrong things on here. So CDC ethics,
with a capital E, really helped me prepare for that part. Oh, and I really have
to thank the communications people across CDC who have helped me with this,
including Alex Mercanti, Brooke Aspinwall, Lucianne Draper, and Brian
Katsiewicz. I'm sure I'm forgetting other people, but thank you so much. Yeah, I
guess myself and Nabil were in a smaller institute, and we don't have that kind
of level of clearance that's required. More or less, people are just happy that
we're doing any public engagement at all. And I was like, yay, great. So I've
seen some things. I can't remember if it's from Sanger or from Quadrant, but
there's like one episode podcasts out there that were like started and never
finished. So I'm sure they're like more than happy that we've continued this.
Absolutely, yeah. And it always looks good on ResearchFish. I put in every
single episode into ResearchFish, which is for showing impact against grants. So
it makes a big, long, nice, bulky list. That's amazing. Do you have any other
things, Nabil? Oh, well, in terms of preparing for this, I just read a lot of
content. I mean, Lee, you dug out a lot of articles about podcasting, and there
is a lot of material out there. Just have a look how to start up a podcast kind
of thing. And that's where I went with it. I didn't talk to anyone in
particular, but I mean, between the both of you, it seems like we had a lot of
input from elsewhere anyway. And then, of course, we also recorded quite a few
before we even launched. Yeah, so I think this was all Lee's idea. I don't know
where you got this inspiration for this, but you came up with this idea of
having a pilot episode and like a season, like we sort of actually went through
a rough run-through of what would an episode look like, what would the content
be, what would we say, what would a season of like a set of episode six, we
picked six episodes, what would they look like, what would the content be, what
would the release schedule be, you know, all of this, all of the kind of bits
and bobs that you'd need to flesh out. We had that on paper, an outline before
we started. Yeah, I got all that from the blog that you mentioned. I can't
believe I forgot to mention the blog, so I really dug in. And once we decided to
start off the podcast, by the way, even before we decided that for sure, like
that was an idea that you guys brought up, and I was just like, I don't know. I
went to my brother who works in social media, and he's just like, yes, nobody's
doing this kind of stuff, it's an open space. And I'm not doing this for money,
right, like we don't get any money from this, but he's very business oriented,
and he was saying things like, yes, this is such an open market, and he was
using business terms like market on me. And I was like, you know what, if it's
an open market, then maybe it's just like an open place where people can learn
bioinformatics tips from us. And I wasn't sure about that, but it turns out that
we do have a good niche. So I'm very happy that we did this. And of course, we
don't make any money off this, yes, there is zero money, zero advertisement,
zero funding agency for this. But if someone wants to buy us a coffee, they can.
Yeah, I'll accept a coffee. And then from that blog, I mean, they had all sorts
of tips, like how to structure it, like is your podcast going to be an interview
style? Are you going to have this kind of style? And we went through the
different options, and we decided that a good back and forth between co-hosts
was the right style. And you mentioned also that we went ahead and recorded a
whole season. Do you remember the first episode we recorded? Yeah, it was a bit
of a car crash, wasn't it? Yes. It was actually the FastQ episode, so we didn't
release it first, but it came out, I think, third, was it? I think so, yeah. And
we just chose like a very dry topic, just something to, as a practice, that we
could just throw away if we wanted to. Yeah, it was the throwaway episode. But
we released it anyway, you know, if we'd done all the work, we might as well
release it, you know? Yeah. I promise we haven't proved though since then. No
one really complained about the FastQ episode, except that the audio quality
wasn't fantastic, because that was obviously the first edit we'd done, and we
hadn't sussed out the best methods for recording. Just as a pro tip to anyone,
you can't fix, there's very little you can fix in post if your initial audio is
pretty trash. So just buy a decent microphone to begin with, you'll save
yourself a lot of hassle. I don't know how much yours is, Lee. Mine isn't too
much, it's just a basic car toy USB thing, it was about 50 pounds. I think you
got a shotgun mic for about 30 bucks or something? Oh no, not 30 bucks, but
maybe on the same range of 50 pounds, but in dollars. So I think it was
somewhere between 50 and 100 dollars. And I mean, part of this is to help
promote my activities also at the Center for Food Safety and UGA, and so I was
able to get that with my adjunct membership grant from UGA, from the University
of Georgia, which I really appreciate. And of course I'm on a blue Yeti
microphone, recommended by Nabil. It looks good. It is, it's great. Andrew is
showing off his microphone on the video. Okay, this is my son's one. He got it
for Christmas so he could podcast, but I'm borrowing it. Yeah, the Yeti was the
YouTube influence because that's a YouTube streamer favorite is the Blue Yeti,
and people will argue one way or the other whether it's any good or not, but you
know, for the price compared to other things, but we're happy with it, I think.
I mean, that one in particular was bought because it's unidirectional, so it was
good for interview style meetings or when there was two, three of us in a room
or something like that. It was very good, yeah, and the sound quality is
amazing. And you can really hear it, you know, as time goes on and when we have
these better microphones and we have better editing techniques that the quality
has improved. I know the first few were possibly a little ropey, though, some of
the feedback we got, but things have gotten better, I assure you. Maybe we
should just junk the first, you know, few episodes and rerecord. Believe it or
not, they're still, they are still our best fairing episodes. The What Software
Not to Write is, and part two, is like our best episodes, most listened to
episodes. And then it's Torsten's episode, which we recorded out in the hallway
by the cafe at work. So, you know, there were people coming and going, and that
still people really enjoyed the content. I mean, basically, as long as your
audio isn't sort of distractingly bad.  you can get away with it, I think. And
that was at a food safety hackathon that we had in Quadram, so there's a good
dual use of podcasting and hackathon at the same time. Once we got all this
stuff together, these ideas, we got together the equipment, Andrew, how did we
actually start up in digital space? So I signed up with SoundCloud, and we
needed a place just to host the actual files and then create an RSS feed to
syndicate. And that just seemed to be the easiest way, pay a few pounds and off
you go for the year. And then you get an RSS feed, and from there you can then
pass that URL around to different services and register it with your Spotify,
Google, iTunes, all the rest. And it seemed to work quite straightforward. You
know, it wasn't that hard, I don't think. There was a bit of reading around,
finding out where you put stuff. But I think once you get into something like
iTunes, then virtually every podcast app just seems to magically work and
magically find the podcast. If people don't know, when you go to iTunes or you
go to Spotify, the sound, the audio itself isn't actually on any of those
services. They're just picking it up from somewhere else. And that is just
through an RSS feed as Andrew's describing. And someone has to go and tell all
of these different syndication services, here's an RSS feed for a podcast that
the service needs to pay attention to. So yeah, you just go through, it's not a
difficult thing. It's just a form. You have to obviously have an account at each
of these places, and you just have a form that you fill in giving the RSS feed,
and then that gets picked up. I think initially we covered quite a few of them,
but even as we went on in the first run of episodes, people were saying, oh
yeah, I wanna listen to it, but I don't see it on app XYZ. And then it was a
matter of just digging out the process of having it picked up on that service.
But a lot of them do just eat whatever iTunes is distributing as well. So I
think now, I think we've got pretty decent coverage across all of the major
syndication services. But that is like a weird step that it was sort of
confusing how that actually works internally. I actually had to read something
to figure out what is going on. I'm glad you figured all that out because that
was beyond me too. And I'm not the biggest social media expert out there, but
you guys advertise pretty well on different platforms also, right? Before we
started. Yeah, we got the word out. Twitter, Biostars, Reddit, Slack, Facebook,
you name it. I'm sure we hit it. And also amongst our friends. And then I know
my institute, the Quadram, put out a blog post and a news item on it as well. So
we got a bit of, we got the word out. And luckily it didn't flop. People did
actually listen. And then we did one more thing also. Nabil kind of got us set
up on the Google Cloud for us to start storing our things. That was fairly
straightforward. Just a straight Google Drive folder. Doesn't have to be- With
subfolders for each episode as well, to keep it nice and organized. Yep. And
special places to keep new ideas and snippets of other potential ideas and
things like that. You do need something to keep it a bit organized. So once we
had all that set up, how did we start off with a pilot on the first season?
Well, we had to Google doc a load of random ideas and I'm sure we haven't done
half those yet, but we just had a big brain dump. And then we started trying to
expand them and sort them and see which ones would do first. And so we chose
fast queue files and the history behind those. But even though I proposed this
episode, I didn't want to speak on the episode. So you won't hear my voice on
it. That's right. I forgot about that part also. We decided back then, we
decided on a two person co-host format based on that blog. And we were going to
say that you were in the control room or something. I'd be like the overlord in
the background. The silent partner. Yeah, but I think it's much better with
three of us talking. I think this is good. It's a bit of fun. Yeah, I mean,
that's something for people to consider if they're making their own thing on how
that works because some people just have the gift of the gab and they can just
talk and they can just be a one man show and that's fine. And other people are
quite happy with two. But I think for three, it works really well for us because
we all have different points of views and we sort of bounce off each other
pretty well. And it feels more like a party. No, I agree with that. I look
forward to hopping on a call with you guys. This is really fun for me actually.
So this is a party. So after we had our brain dump and we had, I think it was
something like 30 episodes just ideas dumped out. We started off with six
episodes, right? We had our pilot episode, but I don't know. We had to kind of
package it up. So do you remember how we might've put together our first six
episodes, the trailer? Like how did we come up with an idea of like a season?
How often we would have an episode come out? Yeah, I think we fixed, we did that
at the start because we weren't sure how much effort it was going to be to put
together. At least for me, I found that was, it was quite good to at least make
a commitment of, okay, we're going to make six episodes and we're going to flesh
these all out and see how it goes and then start releasing them after some time.
Another benefit for that is because we prerecorded six episodes that gave us
some leeway to see how it was performing. And then we could use that feedback
and then start already start on a next set of episodes while those were running
out. We sort of structured it so that we'd had the first one, you know, we did
the pilot. We weren't, that was sort of irrelevant where that was going to go.
We led with two strong episodes and then we had Torsen's one as like episode six
as a sort of season finale and that capped it off quite nicely. Now, I think
that we're quite comfortable with the format and we're able to, we sort of, you
know, now that we're comfortable with the format, we don't actually do that
anymore. We sort of just generate, we just generate more and more episodes and
keep adding those to the queue. But also we've gotten better as well. Like when
we record one episode, we might actually, when we have one recording session, we
might actually record two or even three episodes and we've gotten a little bit
better with timing and when to cut things and move on to the next. And it means
that we can do a lot more content in a short amount of time because no one
really wants to listen to two hour podcasts of us just, you know, yammering on.
I think what about half an hour, you know, is a nice thing to aim for. Gravity
is the soul of wit. Yes. I've learned a better pace of speech actually and not
to interrupt you guys as often. I know I'm still not perfect. We were just like
this when we started where when you start speaking, you have a lot of ums and
ahs and you speak really fast. And now, if you listen to us now, we talk quite
differently. Sort of slow it down and take pauses. Let the words hang in the air
for a bit. It's perfectly fine. And if there's any issues at all, you know, just
stop, redo the line or stop and restate what you want to say because that'll get
cleaned up in an edit or something down the line. So, what people or the kind of
audio that people can't work with when you're editing is when they've said
something really interesting, but it's buried because they said it too fast.
They've said it with a lot of other extra bits around it, extra sentences around
it. And so then the message is completely incomprehensible. That's something you
can't fix on the edit because everything, all the audio is intertwined. You
can't pull it back, pull it apart. So, I think in terms of us editing it, we
learned what, how you should speak to make the editing easier. And then that
sped up the process. It's sort of this feedback loop. Do you feel like you
separate your ums by pauses now? Because I do. I definitely um less, I think.
But no, but the ums are important because that's how people normally speak. So,
you don't need to worry about the ums. We all have our different types of ums.
Things like and, and so, and just quite a variety. It's not just um. Yeah, I
think the one gap filler sound that people make that's the most irritating for
listeners is the sort of click. Some people like smack their lips and have a
click. Yeah, and so we did that. And that is really harsh on the ears if you're
listening to it on headphones or something like that. So, that's the one that I
religiously cut out of any episode for arm editing because that hurts. That
hurts me. I don't know about both of you. I haven't come across it yet, but I
would. I would cut it. So, to improve the audio quality, at the beginning we
were, or I suppose middle of the way through, we were recording individually and
recording our own tracks locally because that seemed to give much better quality
than recording it over the web. But actually, I think now that we're using Zoom
totally, it just seems to work a lot better.  And we get quite good quality out
of it and we don't need to do multiple tracks anymore Yeah, I think they were
totally comfortable with zoom I don't get nervous about whether or not it's
gonna get recorded correctly or not. It just works now. It's great. I Was so
nervous the beginning of this. Do you remember I super? Requested extra above
I'm beyond requested that that we get an SOP For making edits on our recordings
and no bill you you obliged me and made that so I appreciate it Yeah, no
worries. I mean, um, I mean I tinkered with audacity before for the sound
editing. That's the program we use but I don't think either you had too much
experience with it and so we had a Description of the different methods we can
use to clean up and so on and I put that into an SOP with screenshots and
parameters that suggestive I could suggest and From that We you know, that's how
we keep the editing consistent though as well We needed to have a sort of
manifesto of that information And then of course we need to decide right now,
you know who's gonna edit this episode I'll take this one on actually I'm okay
with that Awesome. Yeah, that's I think that deciding who's gonna edit the
episode is a hot potato It can take quite a lot of time I think particularly
when people say like em and so and I and and all these kind of things a lot Or
if you need to split things and whatnot Yeah, it depends on how much preparation
we've done on the episode and how comfortable we are with the topic because that
then Rolls into the recording and then that Has a knock-on effect onto the edit
so If there's long Explanations of topics and we're arming and aring and we have
to cut it over and over again Then that that's also a pain to edit downstream
But you get better over time. Basically, that's the take-home message here. It
doesn't doesn't matter I think if I think about the first couple of times I did
the edits for the first season. It was maybe it took me more than two hours per
episode and Now I think I can push through it in about an hour hour and a half I
Might actually we might actually be able to cut two episodes in an hour and a
half Wow, it takes me like three hours now still I'm still learning I guess Is
there like a major? Lesson that you learned after a year of podcasting invest in
a decent microphone, I Mean initially do the pilot play around with a few
episodes Get a feel for the content and make sure that that's a thing you want
to do but when you're sure and you're serious just buy a decent microphone and
Spend the time finding a very quiet room to record in like the number of rooms
we have gone to in our building to try and find something without a hum or a Fan
somewhere or a banging noise or I don't know toilet flushing whatever, you know,
it's quite hard There's very few really quiet rooms in a busy building Yeah, you
don't notice it in person but when you play it back to yourself with headphones,
you can hear this tapping or something or other and It starts to become
distracting Then you become paranoid about it my lesson is probably Is probably
and make make my wife happier about kicking her out kicking her out of the cat's
office For for two three hours at a time Yeah, I agree with having a quiet space
and it's tough to get that Absolutely. Yeah, and it's harder now that we're all
at home as well I mean, I've got two kids downstairs and they're not the
quietest in the world Which room are you in during the pandemic times? I've got
an office a little box room. They call it and in the UK So it's a teeny tiny
bedroom Where you could fit probably one single bed and a wardrobe and that's it
Okay, and which and which place did you decide on when you were recording a
quadrant? Was it just was there a particular room? We have tried many many
rooms. I think the best one was one of the large meeting rooms Yeah, one of the
issues is if you're in a small office space, you will get an echo from the walls
Which is something you've never noticed before if you're standing in a room
speaking, but when you record it you suddenly realize wait There's this annoying
reverb coming and it's coming from the wall So we opted for the largest seminar
rooms because at least you didn't have that echo I mean, it doesn't help that in
quadrant. They love glass and glass is a wonderful thing for reflecting sound
You did try blanket over your head one time did yeah Yeah, there is what I can't
remember which episode it was but I had a towel I had a towel over my head and
the microphone that is a decent lo-fi way of Insulating if anyone ever wants to
try it That's when I knew that you were taking it the most seriously It worked.
I mean it definitely made an improvement. So it did Yeah, I was talking to a
pile of blanket that whole time. It was funny, but very serious Which room are
you in right now? I'm in my it's a third bedroom But it's much like a bar. It's
not attached to another bedroom, which is nice But it's much like a box room. It
could fit a single bed in a wardrobe and that's about it But since the mic is
upgraded, I think I've gotten rid of the echo problems Yeah, that is a very nice
mic and and I just learned that there is a word called box room in the UK I had
no idea Yeah, so what they do is they squeeze in a teeny tiny room and then they
say oh just a three bed or a four bed instead of a two bed Smart So probably
doesn't exist in America where everything you know is bigger and better The I've
learned this when I was house shopping The requirements are you have to have a
window and a closet to list a house as having that extra bedroom Oh, they don't
have a requirement like that here at a door Yeah, it don't make sense so our
house is a four bedroom, but it has a Fifth room that is too small for a closet
and I imagine it's a box room the way you described it And that's where I've
recorded sometimes too. But today I'm in the basement Yeah, basements are
unheard of over here. No free coming We're in tornado land over here in Atlanta.
We have basements not all houses You see we have this single rain Basements
wouldn't last that long You